every few years a major weather event El
Nino hits Galapagus and many scientists
think they're getting stronger with
climate change during El Nino marine
nutrient levels drop and the algae dies
directly impacting on marine iguana
numbers in 1983 60% of them were lost
across Galapagos and on some islands in
1998 a staggering 90 percent of them
died Greg's been shocking some of the
remaining individuals and measuring them
in doing so he's observed something
remarkable it appears that they are
actually at least some of them are
getting shorter in order to survive El
Nino events if you're smaller you're
going to need less food you're going to
expend less energy and your odds of
surviving are going to be significantly
better we're not talking about animals
that are just getting smaller in terms
of their size like someone who loses
weight they're actually shortening and
that's really unheard of in animals with
backbones in addition to being able to
shrink they can grow again sort of like
an accordion
to explore how the iguana's altered
their size so dramatically the team is
going to do something never attempted
before x-ray the iguana's with this
cutting-edge portable machine
no one's ever radiographed marine
iguanas in the field like this to do
this the team first needs to catch a
marine iguana off of the slippery rocks
by the scene
[Music]
that's a perfect first iguana for this
these animals are really pretty relaxed
some animals when you put them on their
back they go into a trance chickens do
this alligators do this
unfortunately marine iguanas do
the behavior of playing dead discourages
predators
it's 78.3
are you ready and yes I'm ready you
better be good at going I'm not gonna
try to do any restrain on okay Andy are
you ready I'm ready one two three little
by x-raying the skeletons of these
iguanas Gregg will be able to confirm
how they achieve their incredible
transformation
his plan is to return and x-ray the same
individuals and by comparing the data
he'll be able to see how these reptiles
might break down and rebuild the bone
tissue
[Music]
alright buddy
you picked a great one yeah see you
buddy
this research is revealing just how
quickly these animals are responding to
challenges
[Music]
you